... 

Department of Computer Science 

RUTGERS School of Arts and Sciences 

Course Details 

01:198:142 - Data 101: Data Literacy 

Course Number: 01:198:142 

Instructor: Tomasz Imielinski 

Course Type: Undergraduate 

Semester 1: Spring 

SAS Core Curriculum Fulfillment: 21C, QQ, QR, ITR 

Credits: 4 

Description: 

This class aims to provide you with a basic set of tools for data literacy as well as general view of the impact of data on society and elements of common sense data analysis and reasoning. A significant piece of the class will be learning foundations of R. R is a statistical software environment and programming language that we'll use to analyze and visualize datasets. Learning simple R will take some work; however, if you're able to master the basics covered in this class, you'll gain a concrete, marketable skill that may very well be extremely useful in your academic and professional life. 

On the statistical side, we'll cover basic topics from statistics and probability that are required to argue persuasively using data (a list of some of the topics to be covered can be found below). This is not a "typical" Statistics 101 class; instead of covering an exhaustive list of topics and asking you to memorize many formulas, our goal is to focus only on the most important topics for convincingly analyzing data now by solving "hands on" weekly data puzzles. 

This class is taught in unique manner - students have to solve "data puzzles" (one or more weekly) and defend their solutions in class in the so called "Court of Data". Students compete in the semester long competition for the titles of Data Masters (aggregated score for all data puzzles and the project) 

One of the objectives of the class is to show the danger of false, random conclusions from data and learning right methodology of "healthy skepticism". 

We will also discuss how not to be fooled by data and show examples of rushed and ad hoc conclusions from so called "big data" in the news and on the web. In addition we will examine both upside and downside of big data on the web. We will talk about privacy, anonymity vs personalization and data ownership when we increasingly rely on online services. 

In Final project your data findings should have real consequences, preferably "actionable" and consequential in the real society. 

Video Intro: https://bit.ly/39KHFRj 

Instructor Profile: Imielinski, Tomasz 

Prerequisite Information: 

Placement in 01:640:026. 

Placement into Intermediate Algebra or higher, or completion of Math 025. No programing experience required. 

* This course may not be used toward CS major degree credit. 

Expected Work: Weekly Data Puzzles, Presentations, Homeworks, Final Project 

Exams: Midterm exam and final exam 

Learning Goals: 

Analyze and critically assess information from traditional and emergent technologies - data analysis in meaningful way 

Apply effective and efficient mathematical or other formal processes to reason and to solve problems - finding patterns in data 

Formulate, evaluate, and communicate conclusions and inferences from quantitative information - present and defend your results 

Analyze the relationship that science and technology have to a contemporary social issue 

Contacts 

Departmental Chair 

Ulrich Kremer 

Undergraduate Director Santosh Nagarakatte 

Undergraduate M 

Learning Goals 

Why Computer Science Prospective Students Major - BA Degree 

Major - BS Degree Minor(s) 

Courses Schedule 

Course Information 

Course Synopses 

Advising 

Electives 

Honors 

Academic Integrity Policy Introductory Computer Scienc Computer Science Course Stri Admission to the Major Computer Science Undergradu Program Tracks 

CS Degrees 

Undergraduate Student Organi Course Registration and Speci Permission 

Undergraduate Quicklinks 

• Academic Calendar 

• Course Schedule Planner 

Degree Navigator MyMajor 

• SAS Academic Advising 

• SAS Core Curriculum 

• 

University Schedule of Cla 

• Web Registration System 

Connect with Rutgers 

Explore SAS 

Quick Links 

Contact Us 

Rutgers Home 

Rutgers Today 

myRutgers 

Academic Calendar 

Calendar of Events 

SAS Events 

Home 

Site Map 

Search 

Login 

Departments & Degree-Granting Programs 

Majors & Minors 

Research Programs, Centers, & Institutes 

International Programs 

Division of Life Sciences 

We Are Hiring! 

Undergraduate Academic Advising Undergraduate Program 

Graduate Program 

Welcome New CS Undergraduate Students Course Registration and Special Permission 

Course Schedule 

Department of Com 

Rutgers, The State 

New Jersey 

110 Frelinghuysen 

Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019 

(848) 445-2001 

Back to Top 

Copyright 2023, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. All rights reserved. 

Rutgers is an equal access/equal opportunity institution. Individuals with disabilities are encouraged to direct suggestions, comments, or complaints concerning any accessibility issues with Rutgers web sites to: accessibility 

complete the Report Accessibility Barrier or Provide Feedback Form.