DATA 1501 - Introduction to Data Science 

Course Description 

This course is intended to provide an introduction into the field of Data Science. Students will develop skills in appropriate technology and basic statistical methods by completing hands-on projects focused on real-world data and addresses the social consequences of data analysis and application. 

Course Credit 

3-0-3 

Learning Outcomes 

Required Outcomes for all Sections of the Course (should account for 70-80% of course content) 

1. Explain the importance of and be able to formulate a data analysis problem statement that 

is clear, concise, and measurable. 

2. Identify and appropriately acknowledge sources of data. 

3. Be able to apply basic data cleaning techniques to prepare data for analysis. 

4. Be able to identify the categorical and/or numerical data types in a given data set. 

5. Apply appropriate descriptive and inferential methods to summarize data and identify 

associations and relationships. 

6. Use appropriate tools and technology to collect, process, transform, summarize, and 

visualize data. 

7. Be able to draw accurate and useful conclusions from a data analysis. 

8. Effectively communicate methods and findings in a variety of modes. 

9. 

Differentiate between ethical and unethical uses of data science. 

Additional Optional Learning Outcomes (should account for 20-30% of course content) 1. Identify goals and methods of testing hypotheses. 

2. Explain the bootstrap methods. 

3. Identify legal issues surrounding the use of data. 

4. Mine data to develop predictive models and evaluation. 

Topics (70%-80% of course content): 

What are data? 

Sources of data, data collection and types of data 

Sampling from a population 

Data errors and appropriateness/Cleaning Data 

The role of data in decision making at various levels of society 

Methods of Data Analysis, including, but not limited to: 

Distributions (including measures of central tendency and spread) Expressions, names, and tables 

Joins 

Arrays 

Functions 

Modeling/mining the data 

Using Computational Tools and Statistical Techniques for basic data manipulation 

Interpreting results of the data analysis/Data Interpretation, possibly including, but not limited to the following: 

Correlation 

Chance 

Decisions and error probabilities 

Classification 

Confidence intervals 

Simulations 

Empirical, Categorical, and Numerical Distributions Assessing Models 

Communicate data-driven insights in multiple media modes 

Data visualization - (including graphs, charts, and histograms - univariate qualitative, univariate quantitative, bivariate) 

Communication of the Data Science Findings and What It Means 

Converting data into actionable information and the role of data in decision making at various levels of society 

Ethical Aspects of Data Science 

Accuracy 

Misrepresentation 

Privacy 

Security 

Additional topics (20%-30% of course content): 

A/B Testing 

Experiments 

Hypothesis testing 

Regression/Least squares 

Prediction intervals 

Inference for the true slope 

Bootstrap 

Bagging 

Clustering 

Frequent Patterns (Shopping Basket Analysis) 

Information Retrieval 

Anomaly Detection 

Legal issues surrounding data 

Causality and Experiments 

Potential Textbooks 

The Foundations of Data Science By Ani Adhikari and John DeNero, the OER that is currently used for the University of California - Berkeley Data 8 Course. 

This is potentially one of many texts that would be appropriate for the course. Optimally, the text would be free or low-cost for students.