New Jersey Institute of Technology 
New Jersey Institute of Technology 
Digital Commons @ NJIT 
Digital Commons @ NJIT 
Computer Science Syllabi 
NJIT Syllabi 
Spring 2024 
CS 375-002: Introduction to Machine Learning 
CS 375-002: Introduction to Machine Learning 
Lijing Wang 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.njit.edu/cs-syllabi 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Wang, Lijing, "CS 375-002: Introduction to Machine Learning" (2024). Computer Science Syllabi. 427. 
https://digitalcommons.njit.edu/cs-syllabi/427 
This Syllabus is brought to you for free and open access by the NJIT Syllabi at Digital Commons @ NJIT. It has 
been accepted for inclusion in Computer Science Syllabi by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ 
NJIT. For more information, please contact digitalcommons@njit.edu. 
Updated: 01/16/2024
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Ying Wu College of Computing
Computer Science Department
Machine Learning
Code: CS375
Time: Tuesday/Thursday, 2:30PM–3:50PM, 2023 Fall
Location: KUPF 117
Mode: Face-to-Face
Instructor: Lijing Wang
Office: GITC 5715
Email:lijing.wang@njit.edu 
Office Hours: Tuesday/Thursday 1:00 pm to 2:20 pm in person. Wednesday 1:45 pm to 2:25 pm
online by appointment. Reserve an appointment slot by following this calendar link. Please try to
do so at least one day in advance. If these hours do not work with your schedule, appointments
are also available by email.
Teaching Assistant with Office Hours:
●
Hao Zhou, hz394@njit.edu, Wednesday 2:00 pm to 3:00 pm online (webex:
https://njit.webex.com/meet/hz394).
Note: I will typically respond to direct communications, such as email, within 48 hours
(weekend exclusive). Allow up to 2 weeks for feedback on submitted assignments. This
feedback will be provided in Canvas. For issues with your grades, contact the TA and cc the
instructor.
Tutoring. NJIT provides a tutoring service. Please contact one of the available tutors. Please
check the website for updates regularly as they may change the information.
Course Description 
[From NJIT catalog]: This course is an introduction to machine learning and contains both
theory and applications. Students will get exposure to a broad range of machine learning
methods and hands-on practice on real data. Topics include linear regression, linear
classification, logistic regression, support vector machines, decision trees, random forests,
boosting, unsupervised learning, and neural networks. There will be several programming
assignments, one course project, one mid-term and one final exam.
Updated: 01/16/2024
[Instructor’s description]: Machine Learning develops computer programs that can improve
their performance by tapping into existing data and taking feedback from the environment.
Systems based on ML have already exceeded human performance in several tasks, including
image medical image classification and games like Chess and Go. ML has also made leaps in
even more complicated tasks, like Natural Language Processing or self-driving vehicles, and it
has even produced art that imitates the style of human artists! This course offers an intense
introduction to the fundamental ML concepts and algorithms that constitute the core of these
spectacular developments. It takes you on a tour from the basic mathematical notions and
algorithms to some of the recent developments, e.g. Deep Neural Networks. You will gain
exposure to cutting-edge ML development tools such as Scikit-learn and PyTorch via hands-on
assignments and projects that will instill a working and immediately applicable knowledge of
ML methods and will prepare you for more advanced ML courses.
Prerequisites
The course does not have other course prerequisites.
Background on some basic calculus, linear algebra, probability and programming ability is
required. The following free online materials are recommended for reviewing this background:
●
Mathematics for Machine Learning
●
A visual guide to NumPy
Course Textbooks
There is no required course textbook. The course will draw material from several sources,
including the instructor’s own notes. Some optional resources include:
●
Bishop, Christopher M., 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (PRML).
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. A comprehensive reference for Bayesian theory that we
will cover.
●
Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville, 2016. Deep Learning (DL),
MIT Press. We will cover topics including basic neural networks, back propagation, and
CNN.
●
Hastie, Trevor and Tibshirani, Robert and Friedman, Jerome, 2008. The Elements of
Statistical Learning (ESL). Second Edition, Springer New York Inc.
●
Aston Zhang and Zachary C. Lipton and Mu Li and Alexander J. Smola, 2021. Dive into
Deep Learning (DDL). arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.11342.
●
Haul Daume III. A course in Machine Learning (Online book)
●
Aurelien Geron. Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow:
Concepts, Tools and Techniques to Build Intelligent Systems (2nd Edition). [GitHub]
●
Sebastian Raschka and Vahid Mirjalili. Python Machine Learning: Machine Learning and
Deep Learning with Python, scikit-learn, and TensorFlow 2 (3rd edition).
Updated: 01/16/2024
Learning Outcomes
By the end of the course, you will be able to:
a.      Identify the main types of Machine Learning (ML)
b.      Evaluate the quality of online resources related to ML
c.      Recognize problems amenable to ML methods
d.      Describe and explain a wide variety of ML algorithms
e.      Apply various ML algorithms in novel situations
f.       Evaluate the performance of ML models
g.      Modify ML models to improve their performance
h.      Adapt ML algorithms and models to the given data and application
Coursework, Assessment and Related Outcomes
Homework [30%]. Six homework of equal grading weight. The weakest of the six grades is
dropped from the calculation.
Quizzes [10%]. Weekly Canvas quizzes reinforcing the material of each module.
Class Participation [10%]. You are expected to attend classes and participate in classes by
listening and understanding class contents and asking related questions.
Midterm Exam [15%]. In-person exam, 80 minutes. Students are expected to bring a fully
charged laptop, as the exam will be on Canvas with LockDown browser. Each student is allowed
to bring at most 5 pages of notes. In the event the exam has to take place online, Respondus
Monitor will be used for proctoring.
Final Exam [15%]. Cumulative, 120 minutes. Otherwise, similar to midterm exams.
Mini-Project [20%]. You are expected to complete a mini-project in a group. The project will
consist of four milestones with weights: [4%, 1%, 5%, 10%]. More details please check the
project requirement document on Canvas.
Grading Scheme and Letter Grades.  The conversion of raw total scores to letter grades will
be based on grouping the scores into clusters and then assigning a letter grade to each cluster.
Projected letter grades will be communicated after the midterm exam and will be constantly
updated throughout the rest of the semester, to reflect the underlying clusters. The final letter
grade assignment will always be in accordance with the graduate grade legend.
 
Grading Feedback. Assignment marks will be accompanied with solutions and general
feedback summarizing common mistakes. Individual grading feedback will be given whenever
possible. Further clarifications can be provided via direct communication with the instructor and
the course grader.
Late Work Policy. In the case when a student is unable to complete an assignment or other
serious reasons, these must be communicated and documented promptly. In any other case, each
hour of delay after the due date will incur a 2% score reduction. No extensions will be granted.
Updated: 01/16/2024
However, the lowest programming score and the two lowest quiz assignments scores for each
student will be dropped.
Class Attendance Policy. Attendance is MANDATORY! Late by more than 10 minutes for a
class will be counted as ‘absence’ from the class. This is a face-to-face class, I will cold-call you
during the class. Attendance sheets will also be used which require students’ signatures. In the
case when a student is unable to attend the class, these must be communicated and documented
promptly. Unless emergency, a student should communicate with the instructor prior to the class
time. Check the class calendar carefully before you schedule any activities or trips during the
semester. Frequent absences due to regular activities (e.g., doctor appointments, family trips,
homework/project dues of other courses, etc.) should be avoided and may result in a failure of
this course.
Exam Policy. Attending (mid and final) exams is MANDATORY! Late by more than 10
minutes for an exam will be counted as ‘absence’. Unless emergency, in the case when a student
is unable to attend the exam, these must be communicated and documented promptly (prior to
the exam time). Whether there is a make-up exam is entirely the instructor’s decision. NOTE:
The mid-term exam will be at Week 8. The final exam date is scheduled by NJIT, which will be
announced around the middle of the semester. The instructor cannot change the exam date.
Students should check the schedule (https://www.njit.edu/registrar/exams/finalexams.php)
carefully before you make a plan for the final week. Exam absences due to regular activities
(e.g., academic conferences/events, doctor appointments, family trips, homework/project dues of
other courses, etc.) should be avoided and may result in a failure of this course.
Failure of the Class. In the case when a student is unable to attend the class or exams, these
must be communicated and documented promptly. In any other case, a student will fail this
course and obtain an F if 1) missing more than three classes; 2) missing any exams; 3) not
submitting course project final report; 4) missing more than 2 out of 6 assignments. No
exceptions will be granted.
Course Topic Schedule (tentative and is subject to change)
The topics covered in this course include the following, presented in the approximate order in
which they will be taught. This list of topics is to be considered a reference that can be adjusted
through the course of the semester to address changing needs.
Week 1
Introduction and Overview
Ch1-2 PRML 2006
[Salimans et al 2016]
[Reed et al 2016]
Updated: 01/16/2024
[Graves et al 2013]
[Google Brain 2016]
[Farfade et al 2015]
Week 2
Linear Regression
Ch3 PRML 2006
Ch3.1 DDL 2021
Week 3
Linear Classification
Ch4 PRML 2006
Ch3 ESLII 2008
Ch4.1 DDL 2021
Week 4
Logistic Regression
PCA
Ch4 PRML 2006
[McMahan et al 2013]
Week 5
Support Vector Machines
Ch7 PRML 2006
[Cortes& Vapnik 1995]
Week 6
Decision Trees
Ensembles and Boosting
[Quinlan 1985]
[Friedman 2001]
[Chen et al 2016]
Week 7
Nonparametric Methods
Unsupervised Clustering
Ch2.5 PRML 2006
Week 8
Midterm Review, Q&A
Midterm Exam
Week 9
Graphical Models
Ch8 PRML 2006
Week 10
Introduction to Neural Networks
Ch5 PRML 2006
Week 11
Tips for Deep Learning
Week 12
Convolutional Neural Networks
Ch9 DL 2016
[LeCun et al 1998]
Updated: 01/16/2024
Ch7 DDL 2021
Week 13
Recurrent Neural Networks
Ch10 DL 2016
Ch9 DDL 2021
Week 14
Project Presentation
Week 15
Final Review, Q&A
Week 16
Final Exam
Assignment Due Dates
Each course module is associated with a 10-minute theory review quiz which is due on the end
of the week when the topic is presented (*).
All other due assessment items are due at the end of the week indicated in the following
schedule:
Homework [30%]
Project Milestones [25%]
Interview-style Exams [25%]
#1: Week-2
#2: Week-4
#3: Week-6
#4: Week-9
#5: Week-11
#6: Week-13
#1: Week-3
#2: Week-5
#3: Week-9
#4: Week-13
 
Mid-semester: Week-8
End-semester: TBD
 
(*) All items are due on Sunday at 23:59.
Course Policies
General
●
Please feel free to join the office hours (with me and TA’s) to discuss any issues.
●
Email is the best way to get in touch with the instructor. Please include “CS C75001” in
the subject line of your email.
Updated: 01/16/2024
●
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any problems, concerns, questions, or
issues regarding the course, material, or anything else in the class.
●
Please do not hesitate to talk to me if there are situations in your life that are affecting
your performance in the class or your life here at NJIT. I might not be able to help, but I
might know of resources that might help.
Email
Use of your NJIT email or Canvas inbox is strongly encouraged.
Grade Corrections
Check the grades in course work and report errors promptly. Please try and resolve any issue
within one week of the grade notification.
Exam and Proctoring Policy
See the NJIT Online Course Exam Proctoring page for information on proctoring tools and
requirements.
Incomplete
A grade of I (incomplete) is given in rare cases where work cannot be completed during the
semester due to documented long-term illness or unexpected absence for other serious reasons. A
student needs to be in good standing (i.e., passing the course before the absence) and receives a
provisional I if there is no time to make up for the documented lost time; an email with a
timeline of what is needed to be done will be sent to the student. Note that an I must always be
resolved by the end of the next semester.
Fail of the Course
In the case when a student is unable to attend the class or exams, these must be communicated
and documented promptly. Unless emergency, a student should communicate with the instructor
prior to the class or exam time. In any other case, a student will fail this course and obtain an F if
1) missing more than three classes; 2) missing any exams; 3) not submitting course project final
report. No exceptions will be granted.
Collaboration and External Resources for Assignments
Some homework problems will be challenging. You are advised to first try and solve all the
problems on your own. For problems that persist you are welcome to talk to the course assistant
or the instructor. You are also allowed to collaborate with your classmates and search for
solutions online. But you should use such solutions only if you understand them completely
(admitting that you don't understand something is way better than copying things you don’t
understand). Also make sure to give the appropriate credit and citation.
Requesting Accommodations
If you need accommodation due to a disability please contact Scott Janz, Associate Director of
the Office of Accessibility Resources and Services, Kupfrian Hall 201 to discuss your specific
Updated: 01/16/2024
needs. A Letter of Accommodation Eligibility from the office authorizing student
accommodations is required.
NJIT Services for Students, Including Technical Support
Please follow this link.
Canvas Accessibility Statement
Please follow this link.
Academic Integrity
Academic Integrity is the cornerstone of higher education and is central to the ideals of this
course and the university. Cheating is strictly prohibited and devalues the degree that you are
working on. As a member of the NJIT community, it is your responsibility to protect your
educational investment by knowing and following the academic code of integrity policy that is
found at this link.   
Please note that it is my professional obligation and responsibility to report any academic
misconduct to the Dean of Students Office. Any student found in violation of the code by
cheating, plagiarizing, or using any online software inappropriately will result in
disciplinary action. This may include a failing grade of F, and/or suspension or dismissal
from the university. If you have any questions about the code of Academic Integrity, please
contact the Dean of Students Office at dos@njit.edu.
