New Jersey Institute of Technology 
New Jersey Institute of Technology 
Digital Commons @ NJIT 
Digital Commons @ NJIT 
Data Science Syllabi 
NJIT Syllabi 
Spring 2024 
DS 675-1J2: Machine Learning 
DS 675-1J2: Machine Learning 
Ioannis Koutis 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.njit.edu/ds-syllabi 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Koutis, Ioannis, "DS 675-1J2: Machine Learning" (2024). Data Science Syllabi. 14. 
https://digitalcommons.njit.edu/ds-syllabi/14 
This Syllabus is brought to you for free and open access by the NJIT Syllabi at Digital Commons @ NJIT. It has 
been accepted for inclusion in Data Science Syllabi by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @ NJIT. For 
more information, please contact digitalcommons@njit.edu. 
‭New Jersey Institute of Technology‬
‭Ying Wu College of Computing‬
‭Computer Science Department‬
‭Machine Learning‬
‭Code:‬‭DS675‬
‭Mode:‬‭Face-to-Face‬
‭Location:‬‭101 Hudson St, 36th floor‬
‭Instructor:‬‭Ioannis Koutis‬
‭Office:‬‭GITC 4105 and Jersey City‬
‭Email:‬‭ikoutis+cs675@njit.edu‬‭ ‬
‭Office Hours‬‭: Jersey City, Thursday 4:30-5:30, before‬‭class.You can also make  an online‬
‭appointment. Pick a slot on this‬‭calendar link‬‭or‬‭email me- please try to reserve at least a few‬
‭hours before.‬
‭Note:‬‭Your messages will be answered by the end of‬‭the next day. Grades for all items will be‬
‭getting posted during the week after their due date. For issues with your grades, contact the‬
‭grader and cc the instructor.‬
‭Teaching Assistant:‬‭Jingyi Gu (‬‭jg95@njit.edu‬‭)‬
‭Tutoring.‬‭NJIT provides a tutoring service. Please‬‭contact one of the available tutors. Their‬
‭availability and contact information can be found‬‭here‬‭.‬
‭Course Description ‬
‭[From NJIT catalog]‬‭: This course is an introduction‬‭to machine learning and contains both‬
‭theory and applications. Students will get exposure to a broad range of machine learning‬
‭methods and hands-on practice on real data. Topics include Bayesian classification, perceptron,‬
‭neural networks, logistic regression, support vector machines, decision trees, random forests,‬
‭boosting, dimensionality reduction, unsupervised learning, regression, and learning new feature‬
‭spaces. There will be several programming assignments, one course project, one mid-term and‬
‭one final exam.‬
‭[Instructor’s description]‬‭:‬‭Machine Learning develops‬‭computer programs that can improve‬
‭their performance by tapping into existing data and taking feedback from the environment.‬
‭Systems based on ML have already exceeded human performance in several tasks, including‬
‭image medical image classification and games like Chess and Go. ML has also made leaps in‬
‭even more complicated tasks, like Natural Language Processing or self-driving vehicles, and it‬
‭has even produced art that imitates the style of human artists! This course offers an intense‬
‭introduction to the fundamental ML concepts and algorithms that constitute the core of these‬
‭spectacular developments. It takes you on a tour from the basic mathematical notions and‬
‭algorithms to some of the recent developments, e.g. Deep Networks or Recurrent Networks. You‬
‭will gain exposure to cutting-edge ML development tools such as Scikit-learn and PyTorch via‬
‭hands-on assignments and projects that will instill a working and immediately applicable‬
‭knowledge of ML methods and will prepare you for more advanced ML courses.‬
‭Prerequisites‬
‭The course does not have formal course prerequisites.‬
‭Background on some basic calculus, linear algebra, probability and programming ability is‬
‭required. The following free online materials are recommended for reviewing this background:‬
‭●‬ ‭Mathematics for Machine Learning‬
‭●‬ ‭A visual guide to NumPy‬
‭Course Textbooks‬
‭There is no required course textbook. The course will draw material from several sources,‬
‭including the instructor’s own notes. Some optional resources include:‬
‭●‬ ‭A course in Machine Learning‬
‭Online book‬
‭Haul Daume III‬
‭●‬ ‭Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow:‬
‭Concepts, Tools and Techniques to Build Intelligent Systems (2‬‭nd‬‭Edition)‬
‭Aurelien Geron‬‭. (ISBN-13:‬‭ 978-1492032649)‬
‭●‬ ‭Python Machine Learning: Machine Learning and Deep Learning with Python,‬
‭scikit-learn, and TensorFlow 2, (3rd edition)‬
‭S. Raschka, V. Mirjalili, Packt Publishing,‬‭ISBN-10:‬‭1789955750‬
‭●‬ ‭The Elements of Statistical Learning, (2nd Edition)‬
‭T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman‬
‭Learning Outcomes‬
‭By the end of the course, you will be able to:‬
‭a.      Identify the main types of Machine Learning (ML)‬
‭b.      Evaluate the quality of online resources related to ML‬
‭c.      Recognize problems amenable to ML methods‬
‭d.      Describe and explain a wide variety of ML algorithms‬
‭e.      Apply various ML algorithms in novel situations‬
‭f.       Evaluate the performance of ML models‬
‭g.      Modify ML models in order to improve their performance‬
‭h.      Adapt ML algorithms and models to the given data and application‬
‭Coursework, Assessment and Related Outcomes‬
‭Hands-On Assignments‬‭[25%]. Six hands-on assignments‬‭of equal grading weight. The‬
‭weakest of the six grades is dropped from the calculation.‬‭[Outcomes: c,e-h]‬
‭Short Theory Reviews‬‭[5%]. Weekly Canvas quizzes reinforcing‬‭the material of each module.‬
‭No browser restrictions,‬‭open‬‭books/notes/web.‬‭[Outcomes:‬‭a,d]‬
‭Class Participation‬‭[10%]. You are expected to participate‬‭in weekly Canvas discussions‬
‭prompted by the instructor, with meaningful questions and answers related to the week’s topics‬
‭or assignments‬‭[Outcomes: a-d]‬
‭Midterm exam‬‭[15%].‬‭In-person exam, 90 minutes. Students‬‭are expected to bring a fully‬
‭charged laptop, as the exam will be on Canvas with LockDown browser. Each student is allowed‬
‭to bring at most 5 pages of notes. In the event the exam has to take place online, Respondus‬
‭Monitor will be used for proctoring.‬ ‭[Outcomes: a,d,e]‬
‭Final exam‬‭[15%].‬‭Cumulative, 120 minutes. Otherwise,‬‭similar to midterm exams‬‭.‬
‭[Outcomes: a,d,e]‬
‭Mini-Project‬‭[30%]. The project will consist of four‬‭milestones with the following weights‬‭:‬
‭[3%, 10%, 2%, 15%]‬‭[Outcomes: b,c,e]‬
‭Grading Scheme and Letter Grades‬‭.  The conversion‬‭of raw total scores to letter grades will‬
‭be based on grouping the scores into clusters and then assigning a letter grade to each cluster.‬
‭Projected letter grades will be communicated after the midterm exam and will be constantly‬
‭updated throughout the rest of the semester, to reflect the underlying clusters. The final letter‬
‭grade assignment will always be in accordance with the graduate‬‭grade legend‬‭.‬
‭Grading Feedback‬‭. Assignment marks will be accompanied‬‭with solutions and general‬
‭feedback summarizing common mistakes. Individual grading feedback will be given whenever‬
‭possible. Further clarifications can be provided via direct communication with the instructor and‬
‭the course grader.‬
‭Late Work Policy‬‭. In the case when a student is unable‬‭to complete an assignment or other‬
‭serious reasons, these must be communicated and documented promptly. In any other case, each‬
‭hour of delay after the due date will incur a 2% score reduction. No extensions will be granted.‬
‭However, the lowest programming score and the two lowest quiz assignments scores for each‬
‭student will be dropped.‬
‭Course Topic Schedule‬
‭Week 1‬
‭1. Introduction‬
‭2. Nearest neighbors and key notions‬
‭Week 2‬
‭3. Linear regression, polynomial regression, feature engineering‬
‭Week 3‬
‭4. Linear separability, perceptron‬
‭Week 4‬
‭5. The sigmoid neuron, logistic regression‬
‭6. Regularization‬
‭Week 5‬
‭7. Support Vector Machines, Kernels‬
‭8. Decision Trees, Random Forests‬
‭Week 6‬
‭9. Validation and Hyperparameter Tuning‬
‭10. Feature Selection‬
‭Week 7‬
‭11. Ensembles and Boosting‬
‭Week 8‬
‭12. A probabilistic perspective (midterm week)‬
‭Week 9‬
‭13. Dimensionality reduction, Kernel PCA‬
‭14. Unsupervised Clustering‬
‭Week 10‬
‭15. Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks‬
‭16. MLP classifiers‬
‭Week 11‬
‭17. Autoencoders‬
‭18. Computation with GPUs, Automatic differentiation‬
‭Week 12‬
‭19. Convolutional Neural Networks‬
‭Week 13‬
‭20. Recurrent Neural Networks‬
‭Week 14‬
‭21. Reinforcement Learning or selected project presentations‬
‭Assignment Due Dates‬
‭Each course module is associated with a 10-minute theory review quiz which is due on the end‬
‭of the week when the topic is presented (*) .‬
‭All other due assessment items are due at the end of the week indicated in the following‬
‭schedule:‬
‭Assignments [25%]‬
‭Project Milestones [30%]‬
‭Interview-style Quizzes [20%]‬
‭#1: Week-2‬
‭#2: Week-4‬
‭#3: Week-6‬
‭#4: Week-9‬
‭#5: Week-11‬
‭#6: Week-13‬
‭#1: Week-3‬
‭#2: Week-7‬
‭#3: Week-9‬
‭#4: Week-14‬
‭Mid-semester: Week-8‬
‭End-semester: TBD‬
‭(*) All items are due on Sunday at 23:55.‬
‭Course Policies‬
‭Email‬
‭Use of your NJIT email or Canvas inbox is strongly encouraged.‬
‭Grade Corrections‬
‭Check the grades in course work and report errors promptly. Please try and resolve any issue‬
‭within one week of the grade notification.‬
‭Exam and Proctoring Policy‬
‭See the‬‭NJIT Online Course Exam Proctoring page‬‭for‬‭information on proctoring tools and‬
‭requirements.‬
‭Incomplete‬
‭A grade of I (incomplete) is given in rare cases where work cannot be completed during the‬
‭semester due to documented long-term illness or unexpected absence for other serious reasons. A‬
‭student needs to be in good standing (i.e. passing the course before the absence) and receives a‬
‭provisional‬‭I‬‭if there is no time to make up for the‬‭documented lost time; an email with a‬
‭timeline of what is needed to be done will be sent to the student. Note that an‬‭I‬‭must always be‬
‭resolved by the end of the next semester.‬
‭Collaboration and External Resources for Assignments‬
‭Some homework problems will be challenging. You are advised to first try and solve all the‬
‭problems‬‭on your own‬‭. For problems that persist you‬‭are welcome to talk to the course assistant‬
‭or the instructor. You are also allowed to collaborate with your classmates and search for‬
‭solutions online. But you should use such solutions only if you understand them completely‬
‭(admitting that you don't understand something is way better than copying things you don’t‬
‭understand). Also make sure to give the appropriate credit and citation.‬
‭Requesting Accommodations‬
‭If you need an accommodation due to a disability please contact Scott Janz, Associate Director‬
‭of the‬‭Office of Accessibility Resources and Services‬‭,‬‭Kupfrian Hall 201 to discuss your specific‬
‭needs. A Letter of Accommodation Eligibility from the office authorizing student‬
‭accommodations is required.‬
‭NJIT Services for Students, Including Technical Support‬
‭Please follow this‬‭link‬‭.‬
‭Canvas Accessibility Statement‬
‭Please follow this‬‭link‬‭.‬
‭Generative AI Tools and Other External Resources‬
‭Sometimes you may come across code, text or other helpful information online, or you may be‬
‭able to generate it using AI tools such as ChatGPT or other Large Language Models (LLMs). In‬
‭most cases, you will be allowed to integrate this information into your solution. However, if you‬
‭do, you must always give the appropriate credit and citations (e.g. links) for the material you use‬
‭(especially when you use the code and text you found online). In the case you use an LLM, you‬
‭must say that you did so, and present the entire transcript of your ‘conversation’ with it, which‬
‭should show what you asked and how you guided it, or were guided by it to the delivered‬
‭solution. Your ‘conversation’ with it must be entirely yours, and sufficiently different from that‬
‭of other students.‬‭Failure to give appropriate credit‬‭when using the work of others (whether‬
‭human or AI) is considered plagiarism, and may lead to disciplinary action under NJIT's‬
‭Academic Integrity policy‬‭(see below)‬
‭Academic Integrity‬
‭Academic Integrity is the cornerstone of higher education and is central to the ideals of this course and the‬
‭university. Cheating is strictly prohibited and devalues the degree that you are working on. As a member‬
‭of the NJIT community, it is your responsibility to protect your educational investment by knowing and‬
‭following the academic code of integrity policy that is found a this‬‭link‬‭.  ‬‭ ‬
‭Please note that it is my professional obligation and responsibility to report any academic misconduct to‬
‭the Dean of Students Office. Any student found in violation of the code by cheating, plagiarizing or using‬
‭any online software inappropriately will result in disciplinary action. This may include a failing grade of‬
‭F, and/or suspension or dismissal from the university. If you have any questions about the code of‬
‭Academic Integrity, please contact the Dean of Students Office at ‬‭dos@njit.edu‬
