1 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Title 
 
Fundamentals of Machine Learning 
Course Number  
CSCI-UA 9473 
[Instructors: Please fill in/delete all square brackets, and check your syllabus for digital 
accessibility] 
Instruction Mode: In-person 
Spring 2024 
Lecturer Contact Information 
Monday : 9:55 - 10:25 
Wednesday : 16:20 - 16:50 
Prerequisites: MATH-UA 140: Linear Algebra (or equivalent) AND MATH-UA 235: Probability 
and Statistics (or equivalent) And grade of C or better in CSCI-UA 102: Data Structures (or 
equivalent)  
Units earned 
4 
Course Details 
 Monday 01-22-2024 10:25 to 12:55 
 Location: Rooms will be posted in Albert before your first class. 
Course Description 
Machine Learning is getting more and more important these days with applications ranging 
from autonomous driving to computer assisted medicine, including weather or financial 
forecasting. In the first part of the course, we will study the mathematical foundations of the 
current machine learning algorithms. This includes the main models from supervised 
learning, such as linear regression, logistic regression, support vector machines, ensemble 
methods and neural networks. This also includes several themes in unsupervised learning, 
such as dimensionality reduction, clustering and anomaly detection. In the second part, we 
will explore a certain number of specific applications, such as recommender systems, 
2 
reinforcement learning, and natural langage processing. The class will alternate between 
lectures and Lab sessions. Two entire sessions will be devoted to graded projects. 
Course Objective 
After the course, the students will be able to: 
 Build a machine learning pipeline using Python/Sklearn 
 Handle raw data using Pandas, including missing data, categorical variables and high 
dimensional datasets 
 Handle structured data such as text and image 
 Train a neural network using Keras 
 Understand the statistical framework behind most machine learning algorithms 
 Understand the main optimization algorithms under the hood of machine learning 
 Use reinforcement learning in Open AI Gym, to play games 
 Know and profile customers to recommend products 
 
Assessment Components 
You are expected to attend class in person. Failure to submit or fulfill any required component 
may result in failure of the class, regardless of grades achieved in other assignments. 
 
Teaching & Learning Philosophy 
Required Text(s) 
Electronic Resources (via Brightspace / NYU Library Course Reserves) 
Supplemental Text(s) (not required to purchase) 
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Springer 2006. 
Suvrit Sra, Sebastian Nowozin, Stephen J. Wright, Optimization for Machine 
Learning, MIT Press, 2012 
M. J. Kearns, M. Vazirani, An introduction to Computational Learning Theory, MIT 
press, 1994 
M. Vidyasagar, Learning and Generalization, with applications to Neural Networks, 
Springer, 2003 
T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J Friedman, The elements of statistical Learning, Springer 
Series in Statistics, 2017 
K. P . Murphy, Machine Learning, A probabilistic perspective, MIT Press 2012. 
I. GoodFellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, Deep Learning, MIT Press, 2016 
http://www.deeplearningbook.org 
 
 
Program (subject to possible modifications) 
 
3 
Date 
Program 
Lecturer* 
22/01 M Course introduction  
GS 
24/01 W Tutorial: Mathematical background  
GS 
29/01 M Linear regression, confidence intervals 
PB 
31/01 W Lab: Sale’s prediction 
GS 
05/02 M Likelihood, logistic regression 
PB 
07/02 W Tutorial: Bayes classifier - Multiclass classification 
IC 
12/02 M Support Vector Machines 
PB 
14/02 W Tutorial: Optimization 
IC 
16/02 F 
(W 
mkpday) 
Lab: Titanic survival analysis 
PB 
19/02 M Neural networks  
GS 
21/02 W Lab: Convolutional Neural Networks  
GS 
26/02 M Decision Trees – Ensemble methods  
PB 
28/02 W Lab: Car accidents in France 
IC 
04/03 M Clustering  
GS 
06/03 W Lab: Clustering 
GS 
11/03 M Principal component analysis 
Midterm (written exam, 1h30, no documents) 
GS 
13/03 W Project: Machine Learning 
IC 
20/03 W Project: Machine Learning 
IC 
4 
25/03 M Anomaly Detection 
GS 
27/03 W Lab: Anomaly Detection 
GS 
03/04 W Tutorial: Bandits 
IC 
05/04 F 
(M 
makeup 
day) 
Reinforcement learning  
PB 
08/04 M Reinforcement learning project 
EK 
10/04 W Reinforcement learning project 
EK 
15/04 M Large language models 
ML 
17/04 W Lab: Large language models 
ML 
22/04 M Recommender systems 
PB 
24/04 W Lab: Recommender systems 
IC 
29/04 M Final exam (written, 1h30, no documents) 
PB 
 
* PB: Pascal BIANCHI, IC: Igor Colin, ML: Matthieu LABEAU, EK: Elie KADOCHE 
Grades: 25%: Final exam, 25%: Midterm exam, 25%: Projects, 25%: Assignments 
Grading policy: 
• Four labs will eventually be graded, each on 10 points. Graded labs will be selected at 
random. Lab 1, 2, 3, 4 are graded on 10 points each. 
• Midterm and final exams are graded on 40 points each.  
• ML project and RL project are graded on 20 points each. 
  
Classroom Etiquette 
To optimize the experience in a blended learning environment, please consider the following:  
 
 Please do not eat during class and minimize any other distracting noises (e.g. rustling 
of papers and leaving the classroom before the break, unless absolutely necessary). 
 If you are not using your cell phone to follow the lesson, cell phones should be turned 
off or in silent mode during class time. 
 Make sure to let your classmates finish speaking before you do.  
 If deemed necessary by the study away site (ie COVID related need), synchronous 
5 
class sessions may be recorded and archived for other students to view. This will be 
announced at the beginning of class time. 
 Students should be respectful and courteous at all times to all participants in class. 
Academic Policies 
Grade Conversion 
Your lecturer may use one of the following scales of numerical equivalents to letter grades: 
 
 
US Letter Grade 
US numerical 
French numerical 
  
A 
94-100 or 4.0 
15-20 
Excellent 
A- 
90-93 or 3.7 
14 
Very Good 
B+ 
87-89 or 3.3 
13 
Good 
B 
84-83 or 2.7 
12 
Good 
B- 
80-83 or 2.7  
11 
Satisfactory 
C+ 
77-79 or 2.3 
10 
Sufficient 
C 
74-76 or 2.0  
9 
Sufficient 
C- 
70-73 or 1.7 
8 
Sufficient 
D 
65-66 or 1.0 
5-7 
Poor 
F 
below 65 or 0 
1-4 
Fail 
 
Attendance Policy 
Studying at Global Academic Centers is an academically intensive and immersive experience, 
in which students from a wide range of backgrounds exchange ideas in discussion-based 
seminars. Learning in such an environment depends on the active participation of all students. 
And since classes typically meet once or twice a week, even a single absence can cause a 
student to miss a significant portion of a course. To ensure the integrity of this academic 
6 
experience, class attendance at the Academic Center, or online through NYU Brightspaces if 
the course is remote synchronous/blended, is expected promptly when class begins. 
Attendance will be checked at each class meeting. If you have scheduled a remote course 
immediately preceding/following an in-person class, you may want to write to 
nyu.paris.academics@nyu.edu to see if you can take your remote class at the Academic 
Center. 
 
As soon as it becomes clear that you cannot attend a class, you must inform your professor 
and/or the Academics team by e-mail immediately (i.e. before the start of your class). 
Absences are only excused if they are due to illness, Moses Center accommodations, religious 
observance or emergencies. Your professor or site staff may ask you to present a doctor's 
note or an exceptional permission from an NYU Staff member as proof. Emergencies or other 
exceptional circumstances that you wish to be treated confidentially must be presented to staff. 
Doctor's notes must be submitted in person or by e-mail to the Academics team, who will inform 
your professors. 
 
Unexcused absences may be penalized with a two percent deduction from the student’s final 
course grade for every week's worth of classes missed, and may negatively affect your class 
participation grade. Four unexcused absences in one course may lead to a Fail in that course. 
Being more than 15 minutes late counts as an unexcused absence. Furthermore, your 
professor is entitled to deduct points for frequently joining the class late. 
 
 
Exams, tests and quizzes, deadlines, and oral presentations that are missed due to illness 
always require a doctor's note as documentation. It is the student's responsibility to produce 
this doctor's note and submit it to site staff; until this doctor's note is produced the missed 
assessment is graded with an F and no make-up assessment is scheduled. In content classes, 
an F in one assignment may lead to failure of the entire class. 
 
Regardless of whether an absence is excused or not, it is the student's responsibility to catch 
up with the work that was missed. 
Final exams  
Final exams need to be scheduled for exam week and must be taken at their designated times. 
Should there be a conflict between your final exams, please bring this to the attention of the 
Academics team. Final exams may not be taken early, and students should not plan to leave 
the site before the end of the finals period. 
Late Submission of Work 
(1) Work submitted late receives a penalty of 2 points on the 100 point scale for each day 
it is late (including weekends and public holidays), unless an extension has been 
approved (with a doctor's note or by approval of NYU SITE Staff), in which case the 2 
points per day deductions start counting from the day the extended deadline has 
passed. 
(2) Without an approved extension, written work submitted more than 5 days (including 
weekends and public holidays) following the submission date receives an F. 
(3) Assignments due during finals week that are submitted more than 3 days late 
(including weekends and public holidays) without previously arranged extensions 
will not be accepted and will receive a zero. Any exceptions or extensions for work 
during finals week must be discussed with Dr. Alfred Galichon, Director of NYU 
Paris, or Dr. Beth Epstein, Academic Director. 
7 
(4) Students who are late for a written exam have no automatic right to take extra time or 
to write the exam on another day. 
(5) Please remember that university computers do not keep your essays - you must save 
them elsewhere. Having lost parts of your essay on the university computer is no 
excuse for a late submission. Also consider saving your work on a cloud or a drive to 
avoid any technical issues or loss on a computer 
Academic Honesty/Plagiarism 
As the University's policy on "Academic Integrity for Students at NYU" states: "At NYU, a 
commitment to excellence, fairness, honesty, and respect within and outside the classroom is 
essential to maintaining the integrity of our community. By accepting membership in this 
community, students take responsibility for demonstrating these values in their own conduct 
and for recognizing and supporting these values in others." Students at Global Academic 
Centers 
must 
follow 
the 
University 
and 
school 
policies. 
 
NYU takes plagiarism very seriously; penalties follow and may exceed those set out by your 
home school. Your lecturer may ask you to sign a declaration of authorship form, and may 
check your assignments by using TurnItIn or another software designed to detect offenses 
against academic integrity.  
The presentation of any improperly cited work other than your own, as though it is your 
own, including words, ideas, judgment, images, data, or AI-generated work (like ChatGPT 
or Google Bard), whether intentionally or unintentionally, constitutes a breach of academic 
integrity. It is important that all work submitted for this course is your own. It is also an 
offense to submit your own work for assignments from two different courses that are 
substantially the same (be they oral presentations or written work). If there is overlap of 
the subject of your assignment with one that you produced for another course (either in 
the current 
or 
any 
previous 
semester), 
you must 
inform your 
professor. 
 
For guidelines on academic honesty, clarification of the definition of plagiarism, examples 
of procedures and sanctions, and resources to support proper citation, please see: 
NYU Academic Integrity Policies and Guidelines  
 
NYU Library Guides  
Inclusivity Policies and Priorities 
 
NYU’s Office of Global Programs and NYU’s global sites are committed to equity, diversity, 
and inclusion. In order to nurture a more inclusive global university, NYU affirms the value of 
sharing differing perspectives and encourages open dialogue through a variety of 
pedagogical approaches. Our goal is to make all students feel included and welcome in all 
aspects of academic life, including our syllabi, classrooms, and educational activities/spaces. 
Attendance Rules on Religious Holidays 
Members of any religious group may, without penalty, excuse themselves from classes when 
required in compliance with their religious obligations. Students who anticipate being absent 
due to religious observance should notify their lecturer AND NYU SITE’s Academics Office in 
writing via e-mail one week in advance. If examinations or assignment deadlines are scheduled 
on the day the student will be absent, the Academics Office will schedule a make-up 
8 
examination or extend the deadline for assignments. Please note that an absence is only 
excused for the holiday but not for any days of travel that may come before and/or after the 
holiday. See also University Calendar Policy on Religious Holidays 
Pronouns and Name Pronunciation (Albert and Zoom) 
Students, staff, and faculty have the opportunity to add their pronouns, as well as the 
pronunciation of their names, into Albert. Students can have this information displayed to 
faculty, advisors, and administrators in Albert, NYU Brightspace, the NYU Home internal 
directory, as well as other NYU systems.  Students can also opt out of having their pronouns 
viewed by their instructors, in case they feel more comfortable sharing their pronouns outside 
of the classroom. For more information on how to change this information for your Albert 
account, please see the Pronouns and Name Pronunciation website. 
 
Students, staff, and faculty are also encouraged, though not required, to list their pronouns, 
and update their names in the name display for Zoom. For more information on how to make 
this change, please see the Personalizing Zoom Display Names website. 
Moses Accommodations Statement 
Academic accommodations are available for students with documented and registered 
disabilities. Please contact the Moses Center for Student Accessibility (+1 212-998-4980 or 
mosescsd@nyu.edu) for further information. Students who are requesting academic 
accommodations are advised to reach out to the Moses Center as early as possible in the 
semester for assistance. Accommodations for this course are managed through NYU [SITE]. 
 
Bias Response 
The New York University Bias Response Line provides a mechanism through which members 
of our community can share or report experiences and concerns of bias, discrimination, or 
harassing behavior that may occur within our community. 
 
Experienced administrators in the Office of Equal Opportunity (OEO) receive and assess 
reports, and then help facilitate responses, which may include referral to another University 
school or unit, or investigation if warranted according to the University's existing Non-
Discrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy. 
 
The Bias Response Line is designed to enable the University to provide an open forum that 
helps to ensure that our community is equitable and inclusive. 
 
To report an incident, you may do so in one of three ways: 
 Online using the Web Form (link) 
 Email: bias.response@nyu.edu 
 Phone: 212-998-2277 
 Local Phone: 0033 (0)1 53 73 29 77 
 
9 
Wellness and Counseling Resources 
Mental health resources are available to students studying at NYU Paris through NYU's 
Wellness Exchange. Students can speak to a counselor about a variety of topics, including, 
day-to-day challenges, stress, health concerns and medical issues. Students may call the 24 
hotline at +33 6 83 75 16 10, chat through the Wellness Exchange app for iPhone or Android; 
call (212) 443-9999 to arrange a same-day Urgent Counseling session; or email 
wellness.exchange@nyu.edu during business hours. Alternatively, students can also make 
an appointment with NYU Paris’s onsite Global Wellness Counselor at 
paris.counseling@nyu.edu 
