COMPSCI 389 Introduction to Machine Learning
Lecture Time and Place: 4:00pm–5:15pm in Computer Science Building Room 140.
Instructor: Philip Thomas (pthomas@cs.umass.edu, CS Building Room 346)
Teaching Assistants: Simon Andrews (sbandrews@umass.edu).
Graders: Hitesh Golchha (hgolchha@umass.edu) and Sai Phani Teja Vallabhaneni (saiphaniteja@umass.edu).
Number of Credits: 3
Type of Course and Format: Lecture
Course Webpage: https://people.cs.umass.edu/~pthomas/courses/COMPSCI_389_Spring2022.html
Book: None. Readings will be provided using open access digital resources.
Prerequisites: COMPSCI 220 (or COMPSCI 230), COMPSCI 240 (or STAT 515), and Math 233. A grade of C or better is
required for all prerequisites.
Course Description
The course provides an introduction to machine learning algorithms and applications.
Machine learning algorithms answer
the question: “How can a computer improve its performance based on data and from its own experience?” The course is
roughly divided into thirds: supervised learning (learning from labeled data), reinforcement learning (learning via trial and
error), and real-world considerations like ethics, safety, and fairness. Speciﬁc topics include linear and non-linear regression,
(stochastic) gradient descent, neural networks, backpropagation, classiﬁcation, Markov decision processes, state-value and action-
value functions, temporal diﬀerence learning, actor-critic algorithms, the reward prediction error hypothesis for dopamine,
connectionism for philosophy of mind, and ethics, safety, and fairness considerations when applying machine learning to real-
world problems.
Learning Objectives
To understand the mathematical representation of machine learning problems and techniques for solving them; to be capable of
applying machine learning algorithms responsibly to real problems, accounting for issues of safety and fairness; to be prepared
for ethical considerations that arise with the use of machine learning; to understand key machine learning concepts including
regression, classiﬁcation, neural networks, and reinforcement learning, among others.
Oﬃce Hours
• Mondays: [Prof. Thomas] 11am-noon, https://umass-amherst.zoom.us/j/93633023618
• Tuesdays: [TA Simon Andrews] 2pm-3pm, in Lederle Graduate Research Tower (LGRT) 225.
• Wednesdays: [Prof. Thomas] 1pm-2pm, CS Building Room 346
Piazza and Gradescope
If you have questions that you would like to ask outside of oﬃce hours, please use Piazza. If you do not have access to Piazza
after the ﬁrst lecture, e-mail Prof. Thomas and he will add you to the system. Any question asked on Piazza before 3pm on a
Monday, (not Tuesday!) Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday that is not a holiday will be answered by midnight that same day. If
your question is not answered by midnight, please e-mail Prof. Thomas and he will look into it.
Assignments will be posted on the course webpage (https://people.cs.umass.edu/~pthomas/courses/COMPSCI_389_
Spring2022.html) and submitted using Gradescope. If you do not have access to gradescope after the ﬁrst lecture, e-mail
Prof. Thomas and he will add you to the system.
1
Grading
• Homework Assignments (60%). The homework assignment with the lowest grade will be dropped.
• Midterm (15%)
• Final Exam (25%)
The following table will be used for converting numerical grades at the end of the course to letter grades. Minimum values are
inclusive, while maximum values are exclusive (except for 100). For example, 90 corresponds to an A, not an A-. If a curve is
applied, it will only lower these thresholds – they will not be increased.
Minimum
Maximum
Letter
0
45
F
45
50
D
50
55
D+
55
60
C–
60
65
C
65
70
C+
70
75
B–
75
80
B
80
85
B+
85
90
A–
90
100
A
Schedule
The course will be divided into thirds. The list below indicates planned topics, in order. This is subject to alteration, depending
on pacing and student abilities. Each number corresponds to a week (two lectures).
Part I: Supervised Learning
1. Introduction, regression, nonparametric methods (k-nearest neighbors).
2. Parametric methods, linear regression, gradient descent part 1.
3. Gradient descent part 2, basis functions, feature normalization.
4. Perceptrons, artiﬁcial neural networks.
5. Backpropagation, classiﬁcation, over-ﬁtting, and other topics.
Part II: Reinforcement Learning
1. Introduction, notation, problem formulation
2. Episodes, policy representations, softmax and likely the midterm.
3. MENACE, value functions, temporal diﬀerence error.
4. Actor-critics (and their relation to gradient descent), options, and oﬀ-policy evaluation.
Part III: Ethics, Safety, Fairness, and Connections to other Areas
1. Issues of safety, fairness, accountability, and transparency when applying machine learning to make decisions that impact
people.
2. Ethical considerations when applying machine learning.
3. Connections to psychology, neuroscience, and philosophy of mind.
Part IV: Conclusion This fourth part of the course is not listed in the discussion of the course being broken into thirds because
it will likely be a single concluding lecture (perhaps two).
1. A high-level survey of other topics in machine learning, including natural language processing, computer vision, robotics,
intelligent tutoring systems, and ecological and social science applications. This includes pointers to other courses for
continued learning at UMass.
2
Inclusivity Statement
We celebrate the diversity in our community and actively seek to include and listen to voices that are often silenced in the
computing world. We welcome all individuals regardless of age, background, citizenship, disability, sex, education, ethnicity,
family status, gender, gender identity, geographical origin, language, military experience, political views, race, religion, sexual
orientation, socioeconomic status, and work experience.
This course may require you to work in groups.
As such, we expect that you will observe social decorum at all times
when interacting with peers.
Please make sure to read the UMass Guidelines for Classroom Civility and Respect: http:
//www.umass.edu/dean_students/campus-policies/classroom.
Accommodation Statement
The University of Massachusetts Amherst is committed to providing an equal educational opportunity for all students. If you
have a documented physical, psychological, or learning disability on ﬁle with Disability Services (DS), you may be eligible for
reasonable academic accommodations to help you succeed in this course. If you have a documented disability that requires an
accommodation, please notify me within the ﬁrst two weeks of the semester so that we may make appropriate arrangements.
Class Policies
Attendance: There is no required attendance policy; students who cannot attend class are responsible for any material covered
during their absence. Late arrivals must enter the classroom quietly and discreetly.
Exams: The midterm and ﬁnal exams will be open notes, though no electronic devices will be allowed (except perhaps a
calculator).
Collaboration on Assignments: Instructions regarding allowed collaboration and consultation of outside sources will be
included with each assignment, and may vary from assignment to assignment.
Late Submissions: Late homework submissions will not be accepted. However, the homework assignment with the lowest
grade will be dropped. If an assignment will be late due to extenuating circumstances (for example, you are sick or have a family
emergency) please email Prof. Thomas and this will be handled separately from this policy.
Academic Honesty
General Statement:
Since the integrity of the academic enterprise of any institution of higher education requires honesty
in scholarship and research, academic honesty is required of all students at the University of Massachusetts. Academic dishon-
esty is prohibited in all programs of the University. Academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to: cheating, fabrication,
plagiarism, and facilitating dishonesty. Appropriate sanctions may be imposed on any student who has committed an act of
academic dishonesty. Instructors should take reasonable steps to address academic misconduct. Any person who has reason to
believe that a student has committed academic dishonesty should bring such information to the attention of the appropriate
course instructor as soon as possible. Instances of academic dishonesty not related to a speciﬁc course should be brought to
the attention of the appropriate department Head or Chair. Since students are expected to be familiar with this policy and
the commonly accepted standards of academic integrity, ignorance of such standards is not normally suﬃcient evidence of lack
of intent. Further details can he found here: https://www.umass.edu/honesty/sites/default/files/academic_honesty_
policy_rev_sen_doc_no16-038a.pdf.
Course-Speciﬁc Statement: For this course the penalty for cheating on a homework assignment, the midterm, or the ﬁ-
nal exam will be a failing letter grade for the course.
3
