ECE517 Machine Learning  
 
Syllabus 
DESCRIPTION AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
Instructor’s name: Manel Martínez-Ramòn 
Additional information: 
1.  
a. Office Location: 237b 
b. Office Hours: MO-WED 11:00 to 12 
c. Email: manel@unm.edu 
d. Office Phone: (505) 277-3008 
e. Term / Semester: Fall 
This class covers several advanced topics in machine learning, including statistical learning 
theory, kernels, gaussian processes and deep learning. The course opens with an 
introduction to the basics of Statistical Learning Theory, that leads to the well known SVM. 
Here, the SVM principle is taken as an optimization criterion that can be applied virtually 
to any linear algorithm. For Dimensionality Reduction, the SVM will be used as a particular 
technique for feature extraction or dimensionality reduction strategies. Block Reproducing 
Kernel Hilbert Spaces will be used to provide an introduction to kernel methods, and a 
view of kernels as a similarity measure tool that allows us to generalize any linear 
algorithm by extending them with nonlinear properties. In particular, some LS algorithms 
and SVMs will be extended to the nonlinear case. Also, we will go deeper in the concept of 
regularization already introduced in first part of the course. In the section on Gaussian 
Process Networks, we will introduce an alternative criterion, based on ML particularly 
successful for regression, that will be generalized using kernels. Finally, Deep Learning 
Machines will be reviewed as a third major criterion for constructing ML algorithms.  
This graduate-level class will provide students with a strong foundation for both applying 
machine learning to complex real world problems and for addressing core research topics 
in machine learning. Student taking the class should have the prerequisite undergraduate 
knowledge of probability, statistics and, linear algebra. The background material will also 
be reviewed in the course. 
MATERIALS, TOPICS AND ASSESSMENT 
Textbook 
The topics of this course are not covered by a single book. Students will find all the 
materials in three different ones. The books are written by some of the original authors of 
the topics (Hastie and Tibshirani, Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini. Rasmussen and 
Williams).  Two of the boosk are released their works for free access., and the other is 
available online for all UNM students. This means that while materials are mandatory, 
students are not forced to purchase the rather expensive books, but they can use the 
online versions for free. 
The Elements of Statistical Learning, T. Hastie et al., Springer, 2009 Available online, free 
access.  
Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis, J. Shawe-Taylor, N. Cristianini, Cambridge University 
Press, 2004. Available online through UNM Libraries 
Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning,  C. Rasmussen et al., MIT Press, 2006 (Available 
online, free access) 
Other supplemental materials: 
• 
"A Tutorial on Support Vector Machines for Pattern Recognition", by Christopher Burge 
• 
Hinton, G. A practical guide to train Restricted Boltzmann Machines.  
• 
Hinton, G. E. and Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2006) Reducing the dimensionality of data with 
neural networks. Science, Vol. 313. no. 5786, pp. 504 - 507, 28 July 2006. 
• 
Software of  Hinton, G. E. and Salakhutdinov, R. R. (2006) 
• 
Hinton, G. E., Osindero, S. and Teh, Y. (2006) A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets. 
Neural Computation, 18, pp 1527-1554 
• 
Deep learining page at University of Toronto: http://learning.cs.toronto.edu/ 
Specific course information 
1. Brief description of the content of the course (catalog description). 
This course covers topics in machine learning, including statistical learning 
theory, kernels, gaussian processes and deep learning. The course opens 
with an introduction to the basics of Statistical Learning Theory, that leads 
to the well known SVM. Here, the SVM principle is taken as an optimization 
criterion that can be applied virtually to any linear allgorithm. 
For Dimensionality Reduction, the SVM will be used as a particular 
technique for feature extraction or dimensionality reduction strategies. 
Block Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces will be used to provide an 
introduction to kernel methods, and a view of kernels as a similarity 
measure tool that allows us to generalize any linear algorithm by extending 
them with nonlinear properties. In particular, some LS algorithms and SVMs 
will be extended to the nonlinear case. Also, we will go deeper in the 
concept of regularization already introduced in first part of the course. In 
the section on Gaussian Process Networks, we will introduce an alternative 
criterion, based on ML particularly successful for regression, that will be 
generalized using kernels. Finally, Deep Learning Machines will be reviewed 
as a third major criterion for constructing ML algorithms. 
2. Prerequisites or co-requisites 
Student taking the class should have knowledge of probability, statistics 
and, linear algebra. The background material will also be reviewed in the 
course. Also, it is mandatory to have basic knowledge of Matlab, Phython 
or similar language programming.  
Specific goals for the course 
This graduate-level class will provide students with a strong foundation for both 
applying machine learning to complex real world problems and for addressing core 
research topics in machine learning. 
 
Topics covered 
Introduction 
    
Statistical learning theory. 
• 
Estimation function and risk minimization. 
• 
Definition of learning problems: classification, estimation, unsupervised learning. 
• 
Empirical risk minimization. The generalization ability of a learning machine. 
• 
Consistency of learning. 
• 
VC dimension and the structural risk minimization.  
• 
The Support Vector Machine approach. Detailed derivation. SVC, SVR, SVDD, variants.  
• 
Optimization procedures. 
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces. 
• 
Overview 
• 
Positive definite kernels. 
• 
Main theorems. The kernel trick.  
• 
Kernel based learning machines. 
• 
Some basic kernels and kernel properties 
• 
Kernel development and special kernel classes. 
Gaussian Process Networks 
• 
Basic concepts.  
• 
Gaussian process networks for regression and classification.  
• 
Kernel versions of the GPN.  
o Dual formulation of the GPN. 
o The idea of covariance matrices. 
• 
Parameter optimization and model selection. 
 
Assignemnts, Projects and software 
A number of assignments will be required. They will be published at the beginning of the 
course, thorugh UNMLearn. Their due dates will be posted.  
Student can optionally suggest a project at the beginning of the course. The proposed 
projects will be based on published articles in machine learning or in their current 
research. The students will have to write a report in a standard research paper format, 
and provide simulations and proofs or evidences of the report’s claims, plus a discussion 
of their results. The professor will waive the student conducting a project of part or all of 
the homework as a function of the estimated difficulty and scope of the suggested 
project. 
Experimental projects will be accepted in any platform, but the use of Matlab, Octave or 
Python is strongly advised. 
 
 
Assessment and grading policy 
The class will be graded accordingly to a final exam plus the grades resulting from the 
assignments. Prior the exam, students will have knowledge of their assignments grades. 
The grading percentages are: 
Final exam: 50%. A passing grade on the final exam is required for passing the course.  
Homework 50%. Must be delivered before the deadlines 
Students choosing the grade/no grade option will be also required to deliver the 
homework. Audit students are welcome upon proper UNM registration. 
 
Attendance Policy 
Regular and punctual attendance is required. UNM Pathfinder policies apply, which in part 
means instructor drops based on non-attendance are possible. This policy applies 
regardless of the grading option you have chosen. 
Accommodation Statement 
Accessibility Services (Mesa Vista Hall 2021, 277-3506) provides academic support to 
students who have disabilities. If you think you need alternative accessible formats for 
undertaking and completing coursework, you should contact this service right away to 
assure your needs are met in a timely manner. If you need local assistance in contacting 
Accessibility Services, see the Bachelor and Graduate Programs office. 
Academic Integrity 
The University of New Mexico believes that academic honesty is a foundation principle for 
personal and academic development. All University policies regarding academic honesty 
apply to this course. Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating or 
copying, plagiarism (claiming credit for the words or works of another from any type of 
source such as print, Internet or electronic database, or failing to cite the source), 
fabricating information or citations, facilitating acts of academic dishonesty by others, 
having unauthorized possession of examinations, submitting work of another person or 
work previously used without informing the instructor, or tampering with the academic 
work of other students. The University's full statement on academic honesty and the 
consequences for failure to comply is available in the college catalog and in the 
Pathfinder. 
 Cell Phones and Technology 
As a matter of courtesy, please mute cell phones, pagers, and other communication and 
entertainment devices prior to the beginning of class. The use of cell phones or other 
devices to chat, browse the Internet or for any other purpose during the class should be 
avoided. Notify me in advance if you are monitoring an emergency, for which cell phone 
ringers should be switched to vibrate. 
Netiquette 
• 
“In following with the UNM Student Handbook, all students will show respect to their 
fellow students and instructor when interacting in this course. Take Netiquette suggestions 
seriously. Flaming is considered a serious violation and will be dealt with promptly. 
Postings that do not reflect respect will be taken down immediately.” (Rebecca Adams, 
OLIT 535) 
• 
“This course encourages different perspectives related to such factors as gender, race, 
nationality, ethnicity, sexual orientation, religion, and other relevant cultural identities. 
The course seeks to foster understanding and inclusiveness related to such diverse 
perspectives and ways of communicating.” 
• 
Link to Netiquette document: 
http://online.unm.edu/help/learn/students/pdf/discussion-netiquette.pdf 
 
REQUIRED MATERIALS AND TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 
The Elements of Statistical Learning, T. Hastie et al. (Available online, free access) Gaussian 
Processes for Machine Learning, C. Rasmussen et al. (Available online, free access) Pattern 
Recognition, C. Bishop Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis, J. Shawe-Taylor, N. 
CristianiniA number of tutorials will be available online through UNM library access. 
Computer 
• 
A high speed Internet connection is highly recommended. 
• 
Supported browsers include: Internet Explorer, Firefox, and Safari. Detailed Supported 
Browsers and Operating Systems: http://online.unm.edu/help/learn/students/ 
• 
Any computer capable of running a recently updated web browser should be sufficient to 
access your online course.  However, bear in mind that processor speed, amount of RAM 
and Internet connection speed can greatly affect performance. Many locations offer free 
high-speed Internet access including UNM’s Computer Pods. 
• 
For using the Kaltura Media Tools inside Learn, be sure you have downloaded and 
installed the latest version of Java, Flash, and Mozilla Firefox. They may not come 
preloaded. 
• 
Microsoft Office products are available free for all UNM students (more information on 
the UNM IT Software Distribution and Downloads 
page: http://it.unm.edu/software/index.html) 
• 
MATLAB or PYTHON is required. 
For UNM Learn Technical Support: (505) 277-0857 (24/7) or use the “Create a Support 
Ticket” link in your course. 
  
WEB CONFERENCING 
Web conferencing will be used in this course during the following times and dates: 
For the online sessions, you will need: 
• 
A USB headset with microphone. Headsets are widely available at stores that sell 
electronics, at the UNM Bookstore or online. 
• 
A high-speed internet connection is highly recommended for these sessions.   A wireless 
Internet connection may be used if successfully tested for audio quality prior to web 
conferencing. 
• 
For UNM Web Conference Technical Help: (505) 277-0857 
  
Tracking Course Activity UNM Learn automatically records all students’ activities 
including: your first and last access to the course, the pages you have accessed, the 
number of discussion messages you have read and sent, web conferencing, discussion 
text, and posted discussion topics. This data can be accessed by the instructor to evaluate 
class participation and to identify students having difficulty 
