 
 
 
 
CSCI 467: Introduction to Machine Learning 
Units: 4.0 
Spring 2023, Tuesday/Thursday, 2:00-3:20pm 
Section: Friday 10:00-10:50am 
 
Location:  
Lecture: CPA 201 
Section: GFS 101 
Course website: https://robinjia.github.io/classes/spring2023-csci467/  
 
Instructor: Robin Jia 
Office: SAL 236 
Office Hours: Thursday 11am-12pm 
Contact Info: robinjia@usc.edu. I will reply within 48 hours. Please include “CSCI 467” in your email subject.  
 
Teaching Assistants: Ting-Yun Chang, Qinyuan Ye 
Office Hours: TBD (see course website) 
Contact Info: tingyun@usc.edu, qinyuany@usc.edu   
 
Course Description 
This course provides a broad introduction to machine learning, a family of methods through which 
programs can infer desired behavior from data. We will start with supervised learning, where our goal is to 
learn an input-to-output mapping given a set of correct input-output pairs. Next, we will study unsupervised 
learning, which seeks to identify hidden structure in data. Finally, we will cover reinforcement learning, in 
which an agent learns from observations it makes as it explores the world. The course will focus both on 
applying machine learning techniques and on theoretically understanding these methods and their 
algorithmic properties. 
 
Learning Objectives  
By the end of this course, students will be able to apply machine learning techniques—including supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning—to a wide variety of problem domains. This 
includes being able to choose appropriate methods, implement them, evaluate them, and diagnose factors 
contributing to poor performance. They will also be able to prove properties of machine learning algorithms 
and derive new machine learning algorithms to suit new problems. 
 
Prerequisite(s): CSCI 270, MATH 225, EE 364 or MATH 407 or BUAD 310 
 
Course Notes 
Grading type: Letter or Credit/No Credit 
 
Technological Proficiency and Hardware/Software Required 
Assignments will require a computer with python and the ability to install python packages. Students must 
complete programming assignments in python 3. 
 
Optional Readings and Supplementary Materials 
 
 
 
Page 2 
 
There are no required readings for this class. You may find the following references useful: 
• 
Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction (PML) and Probabilistic Machine Learning: 
Advanced Topics (PML2) by Kevin Murphy 
• 
The Elements of Statistical Learning by Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman 
• 
Patterns, Predictions, and Actions: A Story about Machine Learning by Moritz Hardt and Benjamin 
Recht 
• 
Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations and Opportunities (FAML) by Solon Barocas, Moritz 
Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. 
 
Description and Assessment of Assignments  
Grades will be based on homework assignments (40%), a class project (20%), and two exams (40%). 
 
The final project can be done individually or in groups of up to 3. This is your chance to freely explore 
machine learning methods and how they can be applied to a task of our choice. You will also learn about 
best practices for developing machine learning methods—inspecting your data, establishing baselines, and 
analyzing your errors. 
 
Grading Breakdown 
 
Assessment Tool (assignments) 
% of Grade 
Homework 0 
4% 
Homework 1-4 
9% each = 36% 
Project proposal 
2% 
Project midterm report 
3% 
Project final report 
15% 
Midterm exam 
15% 
Final exam 
25% 
TOTAL 
100% 
 
Grading Scale 
The course will use the following grading scale as a default: 
 
Letter grade 
Corresponding numerical point range 
A 
[95, ∞) 
A- 
[90, 95) 
B+ 
[87, 90) 
B 
[83, 87) 
B- 
[80, 83) 
C+ 
[77, 80) 
C 
[73, 77) 
C- 
[70, 73) 
D+ 
[67, 70) 
D 
[63, 67) 
D- 
[60, 63) 
F 
[0, 60) 
 
We may alter this grading scale but only to lower these thresholds, i.e., only to make the final letter grades 
higher. 
 
Assignment Submission Policy 
Assignments should be submitted on Gradescope. All assignments will be due by 11:59pm on the due date. 
For additional information, see the course website. 
 
 
 
Page 3 
 
 
Grading Timeline 
Assignments will be graded within ten days of submission. 
 
Course Specific Policies 
You have 6 late days you may use on any assignment excluding the Project Final Report. Each late day 
allows you to submit the assignment 24 hours later than the original deadline. You may use a maximum of 3 
late days per assignment. If you are working in a group for the project, submitting the project proposal or 
midterm report one day late means that each member of the group spends a late day. We do not allow use 
of late days for the final project report because we must grade the projects in time to submit final course 
grades. 
 
If you have used up all your late days and submit an assignment late, you will lose 10% of your grade on 
that assignment for each day late. We will not accept any assignments more than 3 days late. 
 
Academic Integrity 
The University of Southern California is foremost a learning community committed to fostering successful 
scholars and researchers dedicated to the pursuit of knowledge and the transmission of ideas. Academic 
misconduct is in contrast to the university’s mission to educate students through a broad array of first-rank 
academic, professional, and extracurricular programs and includes any act of dishonesty in the submission 
of academic work (either in draft or final form).   
 
This course will follow the expectations for academic integrity as stated in the USC Student Handbook. All 
students are expected to submit assignments that are original work and prepared specifically for the 
course/section in this academic term. You may not submit work written by others or “recycle” work 
prepared for other courses without obtaining written permission from the instructor(s). Students suspected 
of engaging in academic misconduct will be reported to the Office of Academic Integrity. 
 
You may discuss the homework problems at a high level with other students, but you should not look at 
another student’s solutions. Trying to find solutions online or from any other sources for any homework or 
project is prohibited. Using AI tools to automatically generate solutions to written or programming 
problems is also prohibited. To prevent any future plagiarism, uploading any material from the course (your 
solutions, quizzes etc.) on the internet is prohibited. Other violations of academic misconduct include, but 
are not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, fabrication (e.g., falsifying data), knowingly assisting others in acts 
of academic dishonesty, and any act that gains or is intended to gain an unfair academic advantage. 
Plagiarism includes the submission of code written by, or otherwise obtained from someone or somewhere 
else. 
 
The impact of academic dishonesty is far-reaching and is considered a serious offense against the university 
and could result in outcomes such as failure on the assignment, failure in the course, suspension, or even 
expulsion from the university. 
 
For more information about academic integrity see the student handbook or the Office of Academic 
Integrity’s website, and university policies on Research and Scholarship Misconduct. 
 
If found responsible for an academic violation, students may be assigned university outcomes, such as 
suspension or expulsion from the university, and grade penalties, such as an “F” grade on the assignment, 
exam, and/or in the course. 
 
Course Content Distribution and Synchronous Session Recordings Policies  
USC has policies that prohibit recording and distribution of any synchronous and asynchronous course 
content outside of the learning environment. 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 
 
Recording a university class without the express permission of the instructor and announcement to the 
class, or unless conducted pursuant to an Office of Student Accessibility Services (OSAS) accommodation. 
Recording can inhibit free discussion in the future, and thus infringe on the academic freedom of other 
students as well as the instructor. (Living our Unifying Values: The USC Student Handbook, page 13). 
 
Distribution or use of notes, recordings, exams, or other intellectual property, based on university classes or 
lectures without the express permission of the instructor for purposes other than individual or group study. 
This includes but is not limited to providing materials for distribution by services publishing course 
materials. This restriction on unauthorized use also applies to all information, which had been distributed to 
students or in any way had been displayed for use in relationship to the class, whether obtained in class, via 
email, on the internet, or via any other media. (Living our Unifying Values: The USC Student Handbook, page 
13). 
 
Course Schedule 
 
 
 
Topics/Daily Activities 
Readings/Preparation Deliverables  
Week 1 
 
Introduction; Linear Regression 
PML 1, 7.8, 8.1-8.2 
 
Week 2 
 
Featurization, Normal Equations, Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation; Logistic Regression, 
Softmax Regression 
PML2.6.3,  4.2, 11.1-
11.2, 10.1-10.4 
Homework 0 due 
Week 3 
 
Regularization, Bias and Variance; Generative 
Classifiers, Naïve Bayes 
PML 4.5, 4.7, 11.3-11.4, 
9.3-9.4 
 
Week 4 
 
Nearest Neighbors, Locally Weighted Linear 
Regression, Kernel methods 
PML 16.1, 16.3, 17.1 
Homework 1 due 
Week 5 
 
Convexity, Second-Order Optimization, 
Support Vector Machines 
PML 8.1, 8.3, 4.3, 17.3 
Project Proposal 
due 
Week 6 
 
Generalization bounds; Introduction to Neural 
networks 
PML 5.4, 13.1-13.3 
 
Week 7 
 
Dropout, Optimizing Neural Networks, 
Convolutional Neural Networks, Weight 
Sharing 
PML 13.4-13.5, 14.1-
14.2 
 
Week 8 
 
Recurrent neural networks, Vanishing 
Gradients, Attention, Transformers 
PML 15.1-15.2, 15.4-
15.7 
Homework 2 due 
Week 9 
 
Decision Trees, Ensembles; In-class Midterm 
Exam 
PML 18.1-18.5 
 
Week 10 
 
k-Means Clustering, Gaussian Mixture Models, 
Expectation Maximization 
PML 21.3-21.4; PML2 
8.1-8.2 
Project Midterm 
Report due 
Week 11 
 
Hidden Markov Models, Dimensionality 
Reduction, Principal Component Analysis 
PML2 29.1-29.4; PML 
20.1, 20.4 
 
Week 12 
 
Learned embeddings, Word Vectors; Multi-
armed Bandits 
PML 20.3, 20.5; PML2 
34.1-34.4 
Homework 3 due 
Week 13 
 
Markov Decision Processes, Reinforcement 
Learning 
PML2 34.5-34.6, 35.1-
35.4 
 
Week 14 
 
Robustness, Adversarial Examples, 
Distribution Shift, Fairness in ML 
PML2 19.1-19.8; FAML 
1-4 
Homework 4 due 
Week 15 
 
Active Learning; Conclusion 
PML2 34.7 
 
FINAL 
 
Final Exam May 4, 2-4pm 
 
Project Final 
Report due May 9 
 
 
 
Page 5 
 
Statement on Academic Conduct and Support Systems  
 
Academic Integrity: 
The University of Southern California is a learning community committed to developing successful scholars 
and researchers dedicated to the pursuit of knowledge and the dissemination of ideas. Academic 
misconduct, which includes any act of dishonesty in the production or submission of academic work, 
comprises the integrity of the person who commits the act and can impugn the perceived integrity of the 
entire university community. It stands in opposition to the university’s mission to research, educate, and 
contribute productively to our community and the world.  
  
All students are expected to submit assignments that represent their own original work, and that have been 
prepared specifically for the course or section for which they have been submitted. You may not submit 
work written by others or “recycle” work prepared for other courses without obtaining written permission 
from the instructor(s). 
  
Other violations of academic integrity include, but are not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, fabrication (e.g., 
falsifying data), collusion, knowingly assisting others in acts of academic dishonesty, and any act that gains 
or is intended to gain an unfair academic advantage. 
  
The impact of academic dishonesty is far-reaching and is considered a serious offense against the 
university. All incidences of academic misconduct will be reported to the Office of Academic Integrity and 
could result in outcomes such as failure on the assignment, failure in the course, suspension, or even 
expulsion from the university. 
  
For more information about academic integrity see the student handbook or the Office of Academic 
Integrity’s website, and university policies on Research and Scholarship Misconduct. 
  
Please ask your instructor if you are unsure what constitutes unauthorized assistance on an exam or 
assignment, or what information requires citation and/or attribution. 
 
Students and Disability Accommodations:  
 
USC welcomes students with disabilities into all of the University’s educational programs. The Office of 
Student Accessibility Services (OSAS) is responsible for the determination of appropriate accommodations 
for students who encounter disability-related barriers. Once a student has completed the OSAS process 
(registration, initial appointment, and submitted documentation) and accommodations are determined to 
be reasonable and appropriate, a Letter of Accommodation (LOA) will be available to generate for each 
course. The LOA must be given to each course instructor by the student and followed up with a discussion. 
This should be done as early in the semester as possible as accommodations are not retroactive. More 
information can be found at osas.usc.edu. You may contact OSAS at (213) 740-0776 or via email at 
osasfrontdesk@usc.edu. 
 
Support Systems:  
 
Counseling and Mental Health - (213) 740-9355 – 24/7 on call 
Free and confidential mental health treatment for students, including short-term psychotherapy, group 
counseling, stress fitness workshops, and crisis intervention.  
 
988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline - 988 for both calls and text messages – 24/7 on call 
The 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline (formerly known as the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline) provides free 
and confidential emotional support to people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week, across the United States. The Lifeline is comprised of a national network of over 200 local crisis 
centers, combining custom local care and resources with national standards and best practices. The new, 
shorter phone number makes it easier for people to remember and access mental health crisis services 
 
 
 
Page 6 
 
(though the previous 1 (800) 273-8255 number will continue to function indefinitely) and represents a 
continued commitment to those in crisis. 
 
Relationship and Sexual Violence Prevention Services (RSVP) - (213) 740-9355(WELL) – 24/7 on call 
Free and confidential therapy services, workshops, and training for situations related to gender- and power-
based harm (including sexual assault, intimate partner violence, and stalking). 
 
Office for Equity, Equal Opportunity, and Title IX (EEO-TIX) - (213) 740-5086  
Information about how to get help or help someone affected by harassment or discrimination, rights of 
protected classes, reporting options, and additional resources for students, faculty, staff, visitors, and 
applicants.  
 
Reporting Incidents of Bias or Harassment - (213) 740-5086 or (213) 821-8298 
Avenue to report incidents of bias, hate crimes, and microaggressions to the Office for Equity, Equal 
Opportunity, and Title for appropriate investigation, supportive measures, and response. 
 
The Office of Student Accessibility Services (OSAS) - (213) 740-0776 
OSAS ensures equal access for students with disabilities through providing academic accommodations and 
auxiliary aids in accordance with federal laws and university policy. 
 
USC Campus Support and Intervention - (213) 740-0411 
Assists students and families in resolving complex personal, financial, and academic issues adversely 
affecting their success as a student. 
 
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion - (213) 740-2101 
Information on events, programs and training, the Provost’s Diversity and Inclusion Council, Diversity 
Liaisons for each academic school, chronology, participation, and various resources for students.  
 
USC Emergency - UPC: (213) 740-4321, HSC: (323) 442-1000 – 24/7 on call  
Emergency assistance and avenue to report a crime. Latest updates regarding safety, including ways in 
which instruction will be continued if an officially declared emergency makes travel to campus infeasible. 
 
USC Department of Public Safety - UPC: (213) 740-6000, HSC: (323) 442-1200 – 24/7 on call  
Non-emergency assistance or information. 
 
Office of the Ombuds - (213) 821-9556 (UPC) / (323-442-0382 (HSC)  
A safe and confidential place to share your USC-related issues with a University Ombuds who will work with 
you to explore options or paths to manage your concern. 
 
Occupational Therapy Faculty Practice - (323) 442-2850 or otfp@med.usc.edu  
Confidential Lifestyle Redesign services for USC students to support health promoting habits and routines 
that enhance quality of life and academic performance.  
 
