Date
Topics
Lecture notes
Homework/
Practice
problems
08/25 Lecture: Introduction, Linear regression; Optimization algorithms
Lecture slides, Optimization
Colab 
Linear algebra
CSCI 567: Machine Learning
Basic Information
Lecture time: Thursdays 5:00 pm to 7:20 pm, followed by discussion from 7:30 pm to 8:20 pm
Lecture place: SGM 123 and Zoom
Instructor: Vatsal Sharan (vsharan)
TAs: Liyu Chen (liyuc), Ameya Godbole (ameyagod), I-Hung Hsu (ihunghsu), Sampad Mohanty (sbmohant), Bhavya
Vasudeva (bvasudev), Wang (Bill) Zhu (wangzhu)
CPs & Graders: Jiayi Chang (jiayicha), Abhay Iyer (adiyer), Sahana Kalakonda (skalakon), Syed Hameed Mohamed
(syedhame), Dipak Wani (dpwani), Rachitha Kagalvadi Shivappa [Grader] (kagalvad)
Office Hours: Link to all office hours.
Communication: All inquiries which do not pertain to a specific member of the course staff should be sent via ed
Discussion (see below). USC email-ids of all staff members are in parantheses above.
ed Discussion: We will be using ed for all course communications (regarding homework, project, course
scheduling, etc). Please feel free to ask/answer any questions about the class on ed. You can post privately on ed to
contact the course staff for any reason. You should be enrolled in ed automatically.
Course Description and Objectives
Is this what we'll learn to do in this class? Or is this what we'll learn not to do? 
The chief objective of this course is to introduce standard statistical machine learning methods, including but not
limited to various methods for supervised and unsupervised learning problems. Particular focus is on the conceptual
understanding of these methods, their applications, and hands-on experience.
Prerequisites
(1) Undergraduate level training or coursework on linear algebra, (multivariate) calculus, and basic probability and
statistics;
(2) Basic skills in programming with Python; 
(3) Undergraduate level training in the analysis of algorithms (e.g. runtime analysis).
Syllabus and Materials
The following is a tentative schedule. The quiz timings are fixed, but the rest of the content will likely change as the
course continues. We will also post lecture notes and assignments here.
Please refer to Ed Discussion for recommended readings. 
Discussion: Linear algebra & Numpy review, Part I
Discussion slides, Linear
algebra Colab I
questions I
09/01 Lecture: Linear classifiers; Perceptron; Logistic regression 
Discussion: Probability review
Lecture slides, Optimization
Colab 
Discussion notes, Gaussians
Python notebook
Probability
questions
HW1, HW1
solutions
09/08 Lecture: Generalization; Nonlinear basis; Regularization
Discussion: Linear algebra & Numpy review, Part II
Lecture slides, Nonlinear
functions Colab 
Discussion notes, Linear
Algebra Colab II
Linear algebra
questions II
09/15 Lecture: L1 regularization; Kernel methods 
Discussion: HW1 review
Lecture slides 
Discussion notes
HW2, HW2
solutions
09/22 Lecture: SVM
Discussion: Problem discussion for Quiz 1
Lecture slides, SVM Colab 
Discussion notes
Quiz 1 practice 
Quiz 1 practice
(solutions)
09/29 Lecture: Multiclass classification; Neural Networks 
Discussion: HW2 review
Lecture slides
10/06 Lecture: Quiz 1  
No Discussion session
HW3, HW3
solutions
10/13 Fall recess 
10/20
Lecture: Neural networks for images and sequences (and Markov
models) 
Discussion: Quiz 1 review
Lecture slides 
Discussion notes
10/27 Lecture: Decision trees; Ensemble methods 
Discussion: HW3 review
Lecture slides 
Discussion notes
HW4, HW4
solutions
11/03 Lecture: Dimensionality reduction and visualization; PCA 
Discussion: Project overview
Lecture slides 
Discussion notes
11/10
Lecture: Clustering; k-means; Gaussian mixture models; EM 
Discussion: Evaluation metrics (precision, recall etc.)
Lecture slides, EM demo
(exercise) 
Discussion notes
11/17
Lecture: Density estimation; Generative models & Naive Bayes;
Multi-armed bandits; Responsible ML 
Discussion: HW4 review
Lecture slides 
Discussion notes
11/24 Thanksgiving 
12/01 Lecture: Quiz 2  
No Discussion session
Practice
problems, 
Practice problem
solutions
12/14 Project report due 
Project logistics
Requirements and Grading
1. 4 homeworks worth 40% of the grade. The homeworks will be a combination of theoretical and exploratory
programming questions. They should be done in groups of 2. One late day will be available to every student for
the homeworks. Note that a group can submit late by using a late day of any one group member, therefore if you
work with the same partner throughout your group effectively has 2 late days available (but you cannot apply both
late days to one homework).
2. Two quizzes during class hours worth 20% each. The quizzes will test conceptual understanding of the material
covered in the lectures, discussions and assignments.
3. A course project worth 20%. The project should be in groups of 4 students. It will be an applied project most
likely be based on a Kaggle competition. Each group will be asked to submit a project report. More information will
be released later.
4. Contributions to the class (Discretionary Grade Bumps): You are encouraged to help your fellow classmates
when possible and improve everyone's learning experience, such as by responding to Ed Discussion questions
when you know the answer. At the end of the course, we will bump up grades of those students who had the most
positive impact on the class, according to the (quite subjective) judgement of the course staff.
Resources and related courses
1. There is no required textbook for this class, but the following books are good supplemental reading for many parts.
Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction [PML] by Kevin Murphy. Available online here.
Elements of Statistical Learning [ESL] by Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani and Jerome Friedman. Available
online here.
PATTERNS, PREDICTIONS, AND ACTIONS A story about machine learning, by Moritz Hardt and Benjamin
Recht. Available online here.
(for more of the theory) Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms, by Shai Shalev-
Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Available online here.
2. This course draws heavily from several other related courses, particular the previous iteration of this class by Prof.
Haipeng Luo and other USC faculty:
Haipeng Luo's class at USC. [website]
CS229 at Stanford. [website]
Greg Valiant's class at Stanford. [website]
Helpful reminders
Collaboration policy and academic integrity: Our goal is to maintain an optimal learning environment. You can
discuss the homework problems at a high level with other groups, but you should not look at any other group's
solutions. Trying to find solutions online or from any other sources for any homework or project is prohibited, will result
in zero grade and will be reported. To prevent any future plagiarism, uploading any material from the course (your
solutions, quizzes etc.) on the internet is prohibited, and any violations will also be reported. Please be considerate, and
help us help everyone get the best out of this course.
Please remember the Student Conduct Code (Section 11.00 of the USC Student Guidebook). General principles of
academic honesty include the concept of respect for the intellectual property of others, the expectation that individual
work will be submitted unless otherwise allowed by an instructor, and the obligations both to protect one's own
academic work from misuse by others as well as to avoid using another's work as one's own. All students are expected
to understand and abide by these principles. Students will be referred to the Office of Student Judicial Affairs and
Community Standards for further review, should there be any suspicion of academic dishonesty.
Students with disabilities: Any student requesting academic accommodations based on a disability is required to
register with Disability Services and Programs (DSP) each semester. A letter of verification for approved
accommodations can be obtained from DSP. Please be sure the letter is delivered to the instructor as early in the
semester as possible.
